# Design Manifesto
## A Path to Building Enjoyable Products
### Introducing the Problem
What products in your life do you find exceptionally irritating?  For me, it is my microwave, which incessantly, regularly beeps until I remove my heated food. My obsessional hatred of the beeping has fed upon itself. As the beeping occurred, day after day, I began to read the noise as a judgement.  Did my microwave not trust that I would remember to take out my food? Did it think I was lazy?  In the “Psychopathology of Everyday Things,” Don Normon generalizes my anger writing “People are frustrated with everyday things” (Normon, 8) arguing that bad design (and not psychosis) are to blame for the anger we feel at the irritating, inanimate objects in our life. He also asserts that this phenomenon is widespread; The world is filled with badly designed products that are annoying users and causing them to doubt their own abilities. In the following manifesto, I will outline five critical tenets to hold as one works through the design process to help build products that are not maddening to use. To justify my five ideals, I will draw upon my personal experience designing a smartwatch application in a Human-Computer Interaction college course and a variety of theoretical texts. Though I will introduce my principles alongside a specific phase of the design process in which I gleaned their relevance, these tenets are useful to recall in every step of the process. 
### Think Outside The Box
Brainstorming is the the first step in building a useful, innovative, gratifying product. When brainstorming with a team, it is important to carefully construct sessions to inspire maximum creativity. In his  “Eight Tips for Better Brainstorming,” Robbert Sutton, warns that it is easy to ineffectively brainstorm. To avoid these unproductive sessions, Sutton stresses the importance of balancing individual brainstorming with group brainstorming. In fact, he advises interweaving these techniques and doing “individual brainstorming before and after group sessions” (Sutton, 3). This order is advisable because first individuals can freely produce a multitude of ideas without judgement or interruption, stimulating maximum creativity, then the group can share their ideas and find common points of interest and then finally, inspired by each-others’ thoughts, members of the team can once again freely construct ideas. 
	
  
  I saw the benefits of this careful brainstorming process firsthand when I was placed on a design team in my college Human-Computer Interaction class and we began to construct ideas. We were given a broad prompt: to develop a piece of technology that could enhance a user’s visit to a museum. We were each given a piece of paper and told to take ten minutes to sketch out four forms this product could take, four interactions it could facilitate, four features and four tasks it could support. The time pressure was freeing: my primary goal was to put ideas on the page, and so I just went with my gut without judgment. This lead to both unique and idiotic ideas.  After the time was up, my group came together to share and I was struck by the vast differences between all of our ideas. In ten minutes, my team of three had generated forty-eight possible aspects of our product giving us a wealth of material to pick from as we began to conceptualize our design.  Some of my ideas that I found the most ridiculous as I was writing them on my piece of paper wound up being my teammates favorite ideas and became critical parts of our product. When embarking upon the design process, its important to find the brainstorming strategies that will best trick your team, freeing individuals to propose a wealth of ideas without fear or judgement. In other words, the team must strip away their mental chains and “think outside the box” in order to innovate.
### Banish Pre-Conceived Notions
After creative brainstorming has brought forth a number of potential tasks to support as well as a potential user group to serve, it is time to begin user research. It is critical that you enter the user-research-phase with as few preconceived notions as possible about what functionality you should include in your product and what specific tasks it should support to ensure that you are truly open to understanding the needs of your users. There are a number of different strategies one can employ to gain insight into a user group such as interviews, contextual inquiries and focus groups. My design team chose contextual inquiries, a user-research method that Beyer and Holtzblatt define in their chapter, “Principles of Contextual Inquiry” as “go[ing] where the customer works, observ[ing] the customer as he or she works and talk[ing] to the customer about the work” (Beyer and Holtzblatt, 41). In my team’s contextual inquiry, we took Williams College students to the Williams College Museum of Art and observed them in two modes. First, we asked them to walk around the gallery however they wished and asked them questions about their thought process when they stopped and paused to look at a work of art. Then, we took them to an art work and asked them to think about the meaning of the artwork. Finally, we asked them to reflect on these two different experiences and give feedback on the types of thought-process they seek in a museum visit. I knew my own answer to this question: I get bored easily in museums and like to construct mental games for myself to stay engaged.  As we conducted contextual inquiries, I was surprised to find that this mental preference was not universal. Some people seek a more meditative museum experience and are irked by unnatural disruptions to their mental calm. Others had their own different strategies for mental engagement that they knew worked best for them. Instead of assuming that all users thought like me, I had to learn to open my mind in order to see the needs of others so that I could design a product that would appeal to a more universal audience.


Based on our inquiry results, my group began another phase of brainstorming (again, employing the “think outside the box” mentality). We visualized our data by creating an affinity diagram, an organized representation of the data from our contextual inquiries made up of post-it notes with quotes from our participants and incorporated our new insight into our user-group into generating a new wealth of diverse, unfiltered and sometimes wacky ideas. In order to design effectively, one must “banish” internal expectations and biases and open themselves to understanding the needs of users. 
### Maximize Inclusivity
To avoid user-frustration inspired by your product, it is helpful to recall one of the first maxims taught in primary school: be inclusive.  In order to gain the widest possible user-base, it is important to forefront accessibility in your design process.  This means focusing once more on the needs of the users (which are different from your own), and considering disabilities that might prevent users from enjoying the product. There are a number of simple steps technology designers can take to make their products more accessible. For example, carefully picking a color-scheme for one’s product can make it more accessible for both dyslexic and color-blind users. In addition, designers can build an information-hierarchy and choose language to make their product easier for screen readers to comprehend, making the product usable for blind users.  But each product often causes a unique set of accessibility concerns to arise. After my group conducted our contextual inquiries, we decided to create a product that would allow for users to have a more mentally active museum experience. We wanted to help motivate museum visitors to engage with the art by encouraging them to put their own ideas about a work of art’s meaning in conversation with experts and other visitors alike. We decided to make our product a smart-watch application to encourage users to spend their museum visit staring at art instead of a screen. Because we were designing for a small screen, we suddenly had to brainstorm features we could include to make our product accessible for visually impaired or elderly users.  Although our original design required users to stand in front of a work of art in order to hear reactions and submit their own, we realized that we needed to change the way our app worked to make it accessible for users who could not stand up for long periods of time. There is no way to possibly list all of the considerations that go into building an accessible product but if you “maximize inclusivity” as you design, then you will hopefully build a product that can be enjoyed by a large selection of the public.
### Revise and Repeat
Once you feel like you understand the user base you are designing for, it is time to start creating a prototype of your product so you can visualize how your product may be used. My team started by making a paper prototype of our smart watch design that supported simple tasks. This meant using post-it notes to create a number of different screens to move onto a paper smart-watch base. Once we had constructed our prototype, we began testing it out with participants. In our tests, a participant would “click” (touch) the paper screen and one member of the group would move the post-it notes to display the screens that corresponded to the user’s behavior. In addition, another member of the group served as a “wizard” meaning that they spoke any time the app would speak.  After each test, we noticed myriad flaws with our product. In our first test, we realized that we had no exit buttons or home buttons so there was no way for a user to get out of a screen. Each test revealed many, many ways in which we needed to change our prototype. After we had thoroughly revised our paper prototype, we constructed a digital prototype that we also revised in response to participant testing. In short, being open to revision was a necessary part of our design process. We had to accept that our original prototype was flawed and constantly edit and adapt our product to eliminate issues. Though revision was most evident for my group in the prototyping phase, revising characterized the entirety of the design process. We revised our initial ideas after we conducted contextual inquiries and after we evaluated the accessibility of our product. Thus, a commitment to revision, re-evaluation and modification is critical as you are designing.   
### Don't Be Evil
Don’t be Evil
There are too many unethical pieces of technology that we are constantly exposed to. Do not make products you design part of this pattern. Here are some principles to hold to formulate ethical designs:


1) Be transparent with your user. If you are taking in personal information of any form, be clear about what you are using it for. For example, in our smart watch app, we wanted to have users enter an email address alongside their interpretations so that they could be notified by email if anyone responded to their submission. It was important to my group that users could choose whether or not they received this email notification—we did not want to be a source of unwanted clutter in someone’s email inbox.


2) Do not cause injury to your users. First and foremost, do not create a product that could cause your users physical damage but also do not injure your user’s mental wellbeing.  My group determined that it would be tricky for our application to physically hurt someone. However, because we are allowing anyone to submit an interpretation, it is possible that users will submit offensive or derogatory content. We decided we need some sort of moderator system to regulate and edit the content on our app to minimize the potential for emotional injury from our app.


3) Ask for feedback. Respond to feedback. If a user feels violated in any way by your product, its important to have a mechanism to recognize this and respond this built into your design.


4) Respect Privacy. We chose to prioritize anonymity in every aspect of our app so that users could protect their identities to the maximum degree. 

5) Design towards a better world. Build something that you can honestly say will improve your user’s life. It doesn’t need to be solving a major world issue (although it doesn’t hurt if it can) but it should at least bring people joy. 
### Final Thoughts: The Importance of Language
When discussing the process of affinity diagramming, Beyer and Holtzblatt write that it is critically importance to use the language of the user whenever possible (Beyer and Holtzblat, 159). My five core design principles, “Think Outside the Box,” “Banish Pre-Conceived Notions,” “Maximize Inclusivity,” “Revise and Repeat” and “Don’t Be Evil” are formulated in personal language that resonates with me. Though I understand that these titles might not resonate with all readers, I hope that the explanations offer sufficient proof that these are critical ideals to hold in order to build beautiful, accessible, easy-to-use technology. 
### Works Cited
Beyer and Holtzblatt. Ch. 3 “Principles of Contextual Inquiry,” pp.41-66 in Contextual Design. Morgan Kaufmann Publishers, Inc (1998). 


Beyer and Holtzblatt. “The Affinity Diagram,” pp. 154-163 in Contextual Design. Morgan Kaufmann Publishers, Inc (1998).


Sutton, Robort. “Eight tips for Better Brainstorming.” In BusinessWeek. 2006.


Norman, Don. The Design of Everyday Things : Revised and Expanded Edition, Basic Books, 2013. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/willm/detail.action?docID=1167019.
