# Research Paper Report
## Paper Citation
 Leiva, Luis, et al. “Text Entry on Tiny QWERTY Soft Keyboards.” Proceedings of the 33rd Annual ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, vol. 2015, 2015, pp. 669–678. 
## Report
In their paper “Text Entry on Tiny QWERTY Soft Keyboards,” Levia, Luis, Sahami, Catala, Henze and Smith offer a comprehensive look at the different ways to implement keyboards on the very small screens such as smartwatches or digital jewelry. They investigate three keyboards designed for small screens: the ZoomBoard Keyboard, the Callout Keyboard and the ZShift Keyboard. In the ZoomBoard, the user taps the screen once to zoom and then again to select a character. The Callout keyboard is similar to many smartphone keyboards where the user selects a key and sees a magnified version of the letter and can shift it around to pick nearby letters. ZShift is similar to the Callout key board but it simultaneously shows you nearby keys in case the user forgets how the keyboard is laid out. To compare these keyboards, the authors conducted user studies in which participants were given five phrases to type. They tested each of the three keyboards on three different screen sizes meaning that they typed each of the five phrases nine times. They found that the ZoomBoard and ZShift keyboards were the most popular despite users finding it frustrating to tap the ZoomBoard twice. ZoomBoards also achieved the best accuracy and speed. In general, they found that participants were quickly able to adjust to typing on a small screen and could produce sentences without grave errors.  Their thorough, carefully-structured procedure lends these results credibility.
##
	Their research could help us add functionality to our design to make it more usable in a museum environment. In our current design, users submit interpretations of pieces of art by speaking aloud to their watch. Speaking aloud to the watch is beneficial to our overall design goal because it means that the user will not be staring at their screen while in a gallery but can look at the art as they interact with our application. However, it is possible that in some art galleries, the environment will be so silent that the user will be uncomfortable speaking to their watch. It is also possible that the watch will mishear the user’s interpretation and record it with errors. Implementing a small keyboard that appears if the user feels uncomfortable speaking aloud or need to edit their spoken interpretation will make our design more usable. Given the data in the article that users can easily adjust to small-screen ZoomBoard keyboards, it seems that we should implement this style of keyboard. Thus, the paper inspired me to revise our design to reduce frustrating errors and give the user more options. 
